Jimmy, the founder of a video game development studio, gets fired from his own company during a board meeting. Devastated, he returns to his hometown of Tainan. While tidying his room, he stumbles upon a postcard he received 18 years ago from his dear Japanese friend Ami. He then receives a phone call from the studio co-founder, who invites him on the final business trip to Tokyo. After the business meeting, Jimmy embarks on a solo trip without a destination in Japan.

Jimmy's thoughts drift back 18 years to when he works at the struggling Karaoke Kobe in Tainan during the summer before university. He meets Ami, a new employee and Japanese backpacker looking for a working place to save up money for an upcoming journey. Assigned to show her around, Jimmy interacts with Ami and becomes romantically interested in her. During the welcoming meal, Ami is asked about her trip. She explains that she plans to go on a trip without a destination and shows her sketchbook of drawings recording her previous footsteps in Taiwan. Impressed, Jimmy suggests she decorate a wall at the karaoke. After the meal, Ami expresses her interest in motorcycles, and Jimmy rides her to an observation deck with a stunning view of Tainan. They bond and discuss their dreams. Jimmy confesses his uncertainty, and Ami encourages him to search for a dream.

In the present, Jimmy arrives in Matsumoto and encounters Liu, a Taiwanese izakaya owner who suggests that he visits Ami's hometown, Tadami. On his journey, he meets a young backpacker named Koji on the Iiyama Line, who recommends they stop at the snowing Nagaoka, where Jimmy is captivated by the scenery, reminiscent of a classic romance film Love Letter. Jimmy recalls that his co-workers asked Ami to describe her ideal boyfriend, but her description contradicts Jimmy's characteristics. However, a co-worker encourages him to date her anyway and gives him tickets to Love Letter. During the movie, Ami cries miserably and finds an excuse to leave the scene, leaving Jimmy confused.

Back in the present, Jimmy meets and befriends Yukiko, a staff member at an internet café who is playing the game he developed. Yukiko offers to drive him to the sky lantern festival. Jimmy then recalls Ami's sudden departure, and her subsequent announcement of returning to Japan. Jimmy is furious with Ami and refuses to talk to her, even when she finishes the wall art. However, encouraged by his father's advice to leave no regrets, Jimmy decides to ask Ami out one last time before she leaves and takes her to a sky lantern festival. They make a promise to meet each other again after they have the opportunity to pursue and fulfill their dreams.

Upon arriving in Tadami, Jimmy meets Ami's mother, Yuko, who reveals Ami's passing. Yuko gives Jimmy Ami's sketchbook, which contains drawings of Taiwan. Through the drawings, it is revealed that Ami has been suffering from cardiomyopathy and wishes to travel around the world during the final days of her life. However, after meeting and falling in love with Jimmy in Taiwan, her desire to continue living is ignited, and she decides to seek alternative treatments in Japan. Therefore, she abruptly leaves Taiwan before her condition deteriorates and refuses Jimmy's requests to see her in later years while she is hospitalized. Overwhelmed, Jimmy weeps as he reaches the last page of the sketchbook—a picture of them releasing sky lanterns, symbolizing their promise.

On his journey back, Jimmy writes a letter to Ami, sharing his life since their separation. He reveals that he was aware of Ami's passing after completing his first game, where he fulfilled his promise to achieve his dream and attempted to reach out to her, but to no avail. Jimmy expresses his gratitude for Ami's presence in his youthful days at the end of the letter, and promises to go on a trip without a destination in her honor.