In 1959, Todd Anderson begins his junior year of high school at Welton Academy, an Episcopalian all-male preparatory boarding school in Vermont. Todd is assigned one of Welton's top students, junior Neil Perry, as his roommate, and through Neil, he meets his friends: Knox Overstreet, Richard Cameron, Steven Meeks, Gerard Pitts, and Charlie Dalton.

On the first day of classes, the boys are taken aback by the unusual teaching methods of their new English teacher, John Keating. A Welton alumnus who studied English Literature at Cambridge, Keating encourages his students to "seize the day", referencing the Latin expression carpe diem.

Keating has the students take turns standing on his desk to demonstrate ways to look at life differently, tells them to rip out the introduction of their poetry books that explains a mathematical formula for rating poetry, and invites them to make up their own style of walking in a courtyard to encourage their individualism. Keating's methods attract the attention of strict headmaster Gale Nolan.

Upon learning that Keating had been a member of the unofficial Dead Poets Society during his time as a student at Welton, Neil restarts the club, and he and his friends sneak off campus to a cave, where they read poetry. Keating's lessons and their involvement with the club encourage them to live their lives on their own terms. Knox pursues Chris Noel, a cheerleader who is dating Chet Danburry, a football player from a local public school, and whose family is friends with his.

Neil discovers his love of acting, and gets the role of Puck in a local production of A Midsummer Night's Dream, despite the disapproval of his controlling father, who wants him to attend Harvard to study medicine. Keating helps Todd come out of his shell and realize his potential when he takes him through an exercise in self-expression, resulting in his spontaneously composing a poem in front of the class.

Charlie publishes an article in the school newspaper, on behalf of the club, recommending that girls be admitted to Welton. In response, Nolan paddles Charlie, attempting to force him to reveal who else is in the Dead Poets Society; but Charlie remains defiant. Nolan also confronts Keating, advising him that he should discourage his students from questioning authority. Keating admonishes the boys, warning them that one must assess all potential consequences of one's actions.

On the eve of the play's opening performance, Neil's father discovers his involvement in the play and demands that he quit immediately. Keating advises Neil to stand his ground to prove to his father that he takes acting seriously. After Neil performs in the play, his father retaliates by withdrawing him from Welton and enrolling him in Braden Military School. Lacking any support from his mother and unable to explain to his father how he feels, Neil commits suicide using his father's gun.

At Neil's parents' request, Nolan investigates his death. During the investigation, Cameron shifts blame onto Keating to avoid punishment for his role in the Dead Poets Society, and he names the other members of the group. When Charlie confronts him over this, Cameron urges the other students to let Keating take the fall. Charlie punches Cameron and is expelled. Each of the boys is called to Nolan's office to sign a letter confirming Cameron's false allegations. When Todd's turn comes, he reluctantly signs the letter under the pressure of his parents, and Keating is fired as a result.

Nolan, who had taught English at Welton prior to becoming headmaster, temporarily takes over Keating's English class. As Keating interrupts the class to gather his belongings, Todd confesses that the boys were pressured into signing the letter that led to his dismissal. Keating assures Todd that he believes him. Nolan threatens to expel Todd and anyone else who speaks out of line. Despite the threat, Todd stands up on his desk and says "O Captain! My Captain!". The other members of the Dead Poets Society, except for Cameron, along with several other students in the class, follow suit. Touched by their support, Keating proudly thanks the boys before departing.