Drea is a popular student attending Rosehill Country Day High School, an elite private school in Miami, on a scholarship. A "conniving, selfish sociopath" who uses people to get what she wants, Drea becomes a social outcast after an intimate video she sent to her equally popular boyfriend, Max, is leaked online. Max claims he was hacked, but Drea blames Max for the video's release and they break up.

That summer, Drea works at a tennis camp where she meets Eleanor, a shy tomboy from a wealthy background who is transferring to Rosehill in September. Eleanor tells Drea about also becoming an outcast when a false rumor spread that she forcibly kissed Carissa, another Rosehill student, at a summer camp years earlier.

Realizing they will not get justice on their own, the two plan to exact revenge on each other's enemy: Drea on Carissa and Eleanor on Max. After a makeover, Eleanor slowly infiltrates Drea's old clique of popular students, while Drea tries to get close to Carissa by working at the school farm, also befriending Russ, an unpopular student and Carissa's friend.

Eleanor is invited to a party thrown by Max, where she discovers he is cheating on his new girlfriend, Tara – Drea's former best friend. Drea steals Carissa's keys to the farm's locked greenhouse, finding the marijuana and magic mushrooms that Carissa is storing.

At the school's Senior Ring Ceremony, Drea places the drugs from the greenhouse in their classmates' dinner so she can steal Max's phone to obtain evidence of his wrongdoings. She anonymously tips off the headmaster about the greenhouse, getting Carissa expelled and sent to rehab. While searching through Max's texts messages, Drea and Eleanor find photos and messages from other girls at school stretching back years.

At a school assembly, Eleanor shares Max's texts to the entire student body, but Max and Tara then pretend to be a polyamorous couple, which in turn becomes the school's latest trend. Drea is rejected from Yale (due to her declining schoolwork). Spiraling emotionally, she concocts a new plan to destroy all her popular former friends at the upcoming Admissions Party, which can only be attended by those accepted by Ivy League schools.

Eleanor enjoys her new popularity and Drea's old friends, beginning a relationship with Max's twin sister Gabbi. When Max and his friends surprise Eleanor for her birthday, Drea crashes the party and nearly jeopardizes their revenge scheme. They fight, going their separate ways after Eleanor asserts that there is no evidence that Max leaked Drea's video. Gabbi overhears this and breaks up with Eleanor for taking Max's side.

Learning someone sabotaged her car at tennis camp, Drea, suspicious of Eleanor, visits Carissa at the rehab facility. Carissa reveals that Eleanor is actually "Nosey" Nora Cutler, the girl at summer camp whom Drea spread the false rumor about and outed as a lesbian; an event she had selfishly forgotten, which prompted Eleanor to change her name and undergo a rhinoplasty. Drea confronts Eleanor, who reveals she had been playing her all along, aiming to cause the same pain she endured from the rumor. Eleanor threatens to frame Drea's mother, a nurse, for drug possession if she refuses to expose her old friends at the Admissions Party. Eleanor T-bones Drea's car, sending her to the hospital, to create a sob story that earns Drea access to the Admissions Party, and tells Russ Drea's involvement in Carissa's expulsion and the mass text leaks, ending their budding relationship.

During the party, Drea reveals Eleanor to be "Nosey Nora" to Max and friends, but immediately regrets it and apologizes to Eleanor, who in turn apologizes to her. Their emotional reconciliation is interrupted when Max confesses to releasing Drea's video, as he found her selfish behavior a risk to his own sociopathy. Eleanor secretly films the confession, quickly sharing the video at the party, turning everyone against Max.

As a result, Max is expelled from Rosehill and his spot at Yale is offered to Drea, who rejects it. Drea apologizes to Russ and they kiss, while Eleanor reconciles with Gabbi, and Max joins a support group to address his toxic masculinity.