Ellie Chu lives in the remote town of Squahamish with her grieving widower father, where she performs most of his station master and signalman duties. She makes extra money by ghostwriting essays for her classmates' assignments. The socially ostracized Ellie is secretly interested in Aster Flores, who happens to be reluctantly dating Trig, a narcissistic and popular boy from a wealthy family.

Ellie's next-door neighbor Paul Munsky, an inarticulate American footballer and future heir of a family sausage business, requests that Ellie help him ghostwrite a love letter to Aster. Ellie eventually agrees to help in order to help her household pay off its bills. Under the identity of Paul, Ellie begins a heartfelt correspondence with Aster about their shared interests in art and literature through letters and text messages.

Ellie's English teacher encourages her to apply to Grinnell College after noticing the proficiency of the essays she had ghostwritten for her classmates, but Ellie plans to attend the University of Washington and stay in Squahamish to remain with her father.

Ellie sets up Paul on a date with Aster, but his obtuse conversational skills hamper his interactions. Ellie planned to give up on helping Paul until he helps defend Ellie from bullies. Ellie starts teaching Paul about art and literature for him to keep up with his fake persona.

Ellie observes from afar that Paul's second date with Aster starts off as badly as the first. In a desperate bid to save the evening, Ellie sends Aster text messages via the user account secretly shared by the phones of both Ellie and Paul while Paul plays along by pretending to type on his phone. Paul on the following day divulges to Ellie that he had kissed Aster - without genuine approval or input from Aster, and even despite telling Aster to keep their relationship platonic - unnerving Ellie.

Paul thwarts bullies' attempts to sabotage Ellie's music recital. Later, Paul stumbles upon letters from Ellie imploring renowned food critics to comment on Paul's original culinary innovations, and is filled with gratitude.

Aster takes Ellie to a secluded hot spring where they share an intimate conversation. Ellie discusses her own atheism, while Aster reveals that Trig intends to marry her. After Aster takes Ellie back to the latter's home, Aster stumbles upon Paul and verifies that he believes in God. From her bedroom window Ellie watches Paul and Aster kiss, upon which she decides to admit into Grinnell College.

During Paul's football match, Aster cheers for Paul, but Paul is more thrilled by Ellie's cheers. Afterwards, mistakenly perceiving them to have developed feelings for each other, Paul attempts to kiss Ellie, but she rejects his advances. They notice an upset Aster observing them. Paul deciphers from Ellie's reaction that Ellie loves Aster. Due to his religious upbringing, he warns Ellie that she is in sin and will go to hell. Later, when Paul delivers his sausages to Ellie's father, they have a conversation about the meaning of love. Paul comes to terms with Ellie's sexuality and chooses to love her as she is.

Witnessed by congregants from across the entire town, Trig proposes to Aster at church, only to be interjected by Ellie and then Paul, who lectures the congregants on love and authenticity. Aster recognizes Ellie's words written from a previous letter and realizes that it had been Ellie all along who had written the letters and text messages as Paul; she slaps Paul and storms out.

Before leaving for Grinnell College, Ellie apologizes to Aster for deceiving her. Aster admits her feelings for Ellie and her future in Grinnell's art school. Kissing Aster, Ellie tells her that she will see her in a couple of years.

Paul, who is now confident about his career prospects, sees Ellie off at the train platform, promising to continue visiting her father. As per Ek Villain, a film they had previously watched together, Paul runs alongside Ellie's moving train, provoking Ellie's laughter along with tears.