In 1951, police investigate the mathematician Alan Turing after an apparent home break-in. During his interrogation, Turing talks of his work at Bletchley Park during WWII.

In 1928, the young Turing is constantly bullied at boarding school. Developing a friendship with Christopher Morcom, who sparks his interest in cryptography, he soon develops romantic feelings. However, Christopher shortly dies from tuberculosis.

When Britain declares war on Germany in 1939, Turing joins the cryptography team of Hugh Alexander, John Cairncross, Peter Hilton, Keith Furman, and Charles Richards in Bletchley Park, directed by Commander Alastair Denniston. They are to analyze the Enigma machine, which the Nazis use to send coded messages.

Difficult to work with, and believing his colleagues inferior, Turing works alone to design a machine to decipher Enigma messages. When Denniston refuses to fund the machine's £100,000 construction cost, Turing contacts Prime Minister Winston Churchill, who makes him team leader and funds them. Turing fires Furman and Richards and places a difficult crossword in newspapers to find replacements.

Cambridge graduate Joan Clarke passes Turing's test but her family will not allow her to work with the male cryptographers. Turing arranges for her to live and work with the women who intercept the messages, and shares his plans with her. Clarke helps Turing warm to the others, who begin to respect him.

Turing's machine, which he names Christopher, is constructed but cannot determine the Enigma encryption settings quickly enough; as the Germans reset them each day. Denniston orders it to be destroyed and Turing fired, but the other cryptographers threaten to leave if Turing goes.

When Clarke plans to leave because of her parents, Turing proposes marriage, which she accepts. During their engagement party, Turing confirms his homosexuality to Cairncross, who advises he keep secret.

Overhearing a clerk talking about messages she receives from the same German coder and always contain the same combination of letters at the beginning, Turing has an epiphany: he can program the machine to decode words he already knows exist in certain messages. They realize that the answer to the daily code combination is in the 6:00 am weather forecast, and that all telegrams contain the same phrase 'Heil Hitler', which reveals enough of the day's Enigma code for Christopher to quickly decode all the messages that same day. Recalibrating the machine, it quickly decodes a message, and the cryptographers celebrate.

Discovering a British convoy is about to be attacked, Turing realizes that if they suddenly react to prevent it, the Germans will know Enigma is compromised and change it. Therefore, the team cannot act on every decoded message, so they do not act to save the convoy although Peter begs them, as his brother serves on one of the ships. Turing asks Chief of MI6 Stewart Menzies to keep this discovery a secret, and in return promises to create a statistical model to choose the warnings to send to maximize destruction and minimize detection.

Discovering Cairncross is a Soviet spy, Turing confronts him. Cairncross argues that the Soviets are allies, working for the same goals, and threatens to retaliate by disclosing Turing's sexuality if he divulges his identity. When Menzies threatens to have Clarke arrested as a suspected spy, Turing reveals that the spy is actually Cairncross. Menzies reveals that he already knew, and he had put Cairncross in the team so he could choose exactly what information to leak to the Soviets for British benefit.

Turing urges Clarke to leave Bletchley Park and terminate their engagement, telling her he is a homosexual. She reacts calmly, saying she always suspected but insists they would have been happy together anyway, as she never expected them to have a 'normal marriage' like most couples. Fearing for her safety, Turing says he never cared for her, and only used her for her cryptography skills. Although heartbroken, Clarke stays on, knowing how important their task is. She refuses to bow down to what Turing or her parents want her to do, or what they think of her decisions.

After the war, Menzies has the cryptographers destroy the evidence, as MI6 wants governments to believe they have unbreakable code machines. The cryptographic team is instructed that its members should never meet again, and should never share with outsiders what they have done.

In 1952, Turing is convicted of gross indecency and chooses to undergo chemical castration instead of going to prison, so he can continue his work. Clarke visits him, witnesses his physical and mental deterioration, and tries to comfort him that he has saved countless lives and made the world an infinitely better place.

The epilogue shows Turing committed suicide on June 7, 1954, after a year of government-mandated hormonal therapy. In 2013, Queen Elizabeth II granted him a posthumous Royal Pardon. Historians estimate that breaking Enigma shortened the war by over two years, saving over 14 million lives; and Turing's work was an important step towards today's computers.