In 1957, the Jets, a gang of white youths, brawl with the Sharks, a gang of Puerto Rican youths, for control of San Juan Hill on Manhattan's Upper West Side. New York City Police Department Sergeant Krupke and Lieutenant Schrank disband their latest scuffle, with Schrank deriding their conflict as pointless since the neighborhood will soon be demolished to make way for Lincoln Center. The gangs are too proud to care, and Jet leader Riff proposes a rumble between the two gangs. He approaches his friend Tony, who is on parole, for help. Tony declines, wishing to reform with the help of Valentina, the Puerto Rican owner of Doc's general store. Meanwhile, María, Shark leader Bernardo's sister, is betrothed to his friend Chino, but yearns for an independent future. At a neighborhood dance at the community center that night, Tony and María meet and fall in love, infuriating Bernardo; however, Bernardo accepts Riff's terms to participate in the proposed rumble, provided that Tony attends as well. Tony later confesses his love to María on her fire escape, and they vow to reconvene the next day.

Bernardo and his girlfriend Anita argue about life in New York compared to Puerto Rico, with Anita's belief in the American Dream contrasting with Bernardo's rude pessimism. Police interrogate the Jets, who deny any knowledge about the rumble. During their date at the Cloisters, Tony reveals to María that his year-long imprisonment for nearly beating a rival gang member to death had scared him into reforming. María makes Tony promise to stop the rumble, and they consummate their love. Tony tries to convince Riff to call off the rumble by stealing his newly bought gun, but the Jets steal it back, with Riff reasserting that the rumble will happen as scheduled. Schrank orders Krupke and other police officers to stop the rumble from occurring, but they are unsuccessful. Arriving at the rumble, Tony attempts to intervene and explains himself to Bernardo, who uses his boxing skills to moderately injure Tony. However, Tony refuses to fight until Bernardo appears to go after Riff; he punches Bernardo several times but decides against knocking him unconscious. Unwilling to let Tony walk away, Bernardo goes after him and grabs his knife while Riff grabs his. After a brief duel, Bernardo fatally stabs Riff before Tony fatally stabs Bernardo in a fit of rage. The gangs flee when the police arrive, and Chino finds Riff's gun.

María gushes about her love for Tony to her coworkers in the late-night cleaning crew at the Gimbels department store. Once their shift is over, she spots Chino, who approaches her and reveals that Tony killed Bernardo, distressing her. When she meets Tony later, she is furious with him but refuses to let him turn himself in and confess to the police as it would mean losing him as well, and they plan to run away together. Valentina laments Bernardo's and Riff's deaths while reflecting on her interracial relationship with her deceased white husband Doc. Meanwhile, Chino plots to kill Tony, over the Sharks' protests. After identifying Bernardo's body at the morgue, Anita returns home and sees María and Tony together as he leaves the apartment. Anita argues with María, but eventually accepts that she and Tony are in love. While Schrank interrogates María about Tony's whereabouts, she sends Anita to warn him about Chino. However, at Doc's, Anita encounters the Jets, who insult and attempt to gang rape her until Valentina intervenes. Traumatized, Anita calls Valentina a traitor for housing the Jets, spitefully claims that Chino killed María, and vows to return to Puerto Rico.

Valentina condemns the Jets, who shamefully disperse, before relaying Anita's message to Tony, who runs into the streets, begging for Chino to kill him. As María arrives, to Tony's relief, Chino emerges and fatally shoots him. After he dies in her arms, a devastated María takes the gun and aims it at the gathered Jets and Sharks, berating them for the senseless deaths their conflict caused, before tearfully dropping the gun. As the police arrive to arrest Chino, the gangs finally end the feud by coming together to carry Tony's corpse into Doc's, with María following close behind.